hello everyone I'm pleased to announce
my new tour for
2024 beginning in early February and
running through June Tammy and I an
assortment of special guests are going
to visit 51 cities in the US you can
find out more information about this on
my website
jordanbpeterson.com as well as accessing
all relevant ticketing information I'm
going to use the tour to walk through
some of the ideas I've been working on
my forthcoming book out November 2024 we
who wrestle with God I'm looking forward
to this I'm thrilled to be able to do it
again and I'll be pleased to see all of
you again soon
bye-bye one of the reasons that the
Roman Empire fell was because the Romans
used lead to seal their wine empora and
Lead is a known neurotoxin and when we
introduced lead into gasoline to stop
the gas from from our our our internal
combustion engines from knocking we
lowered the IQ of people around the
world by a substantial margin
[Music]
hello
everyone I'm talking today to Dr Richie
Shoemaker and Dr Scott McMahon and they
are cardinal investigators into a
problem known as chronic inflammatory
response syndrome and you probably
haven't heard that
before but you may have heard about
conditions like sick building syndrome
or fibromyalgia or chronic fatigue
syndrome and you've certainly heard of
conditions like Alzheimer's and other
degenerative neurological conditions
doctors Shoemaker and McMahon think that
they
have discovered with the help of other
people
obviously at least one potential Pathway
to such conditions and that has to do
with toxins in buildings so the basic
theory is something like this um a
substantial number of buildings
especially those built with drywall
using um anti-fungal
paints have water damage that water
damage produces biotoxins of various
sorts for a substantial proportion of
the population about 25% exposure to
those biotoxins produces an
immunological response that has all
sorts of neurolog iCal and behavioral
negative consequences and
so I found out about this through my
daughter who's been wrestling with
health disorders of various sorts for
her whole life she's convinced me that
it was at least worth a um it was worth
some investigation and that's what I'm
doing and so I decided to I read some of
these gentleman's research papers and
they struck me as highly credible and so
I'm talking them to them today to find
out just what there is to this if
they're right about 20% of the the
population is suffering from all sorts
of conditions often diagnosed as other
illnesses depression included and that's
actually a consequence of exposure to
biotoxins in in water damaged buildings
and this also seems to be a particular
Problem by the way among the military
low-grade military housing much of it
water damaged and mold infested and the
government by the way seems to agree
with that assessment even though not
enough has been done about that so far
so anyways Ong for the ride that's what
we're talking about today Dr Shoemaker
Dr McMahon welcome to the program I'm
I'm very interested in talking to you
guys today my daughter has alerted me to
your work and I've been looking into it
for the last four or five months you
guys have been studying something called
chronic inflammatory response syndrome
and The more I've looked into this the
deeper the rabbit hole goes I suppose
you could say that and I thought the
best way to educate myself and
potentially everyone else who's
listening and watching would be to have
you guys on this podcast so I could ask
you all sorts of questions and so I'm
going to take a a friendly skeptical
approach if you don't mind because what
you're studying is of such magnitude
that if you're correct it's a
catastrophe and so we could all hope
that you're not correct so that it isn't
a catastrophe but I know you've
accumulated a substantial amount of
evidence and so maybe we'll start with
you Dr Shoemaker do you want to just
tell everybody what it is you've been
studying and why you started studying it
and how widespread you think the problem
is most people have a sense of what
inflammation is our body is looking at
environmental stress ores that must be
dealt with and the inflammatory process
as a general rule is part of the
environmental response to to trauma or
stress inflammation can be of two kinds
one is acquired or allergy or kind of
the Adaptive way that the body will
learn how to make antibodies and respond
to stress sores with memory so those
things will be experienced once and then
the twice the next time is is very quick
but we're looking at a different form
the left hand if you will compared to
the right hand of innate immune
responses in which the response to an
antigen or a foreign particle
that's introduced into the body in many
different ways inhalation is certainly
the big way I worry about but it could
be elsewhere but specifically once there
is antigen
detection by the innate immune response
system there should be processing of an
antigen and putting on a HLA molecule or
histo compa Locus a molecule on the
antigen and packaging it in the antigen
present in cells to a naive
lymphocytoid sees this tasty little
morsel package with HLA and an antigen
on it it should turn on a kind of C-
cell a B cell excuse me to make an
antibody the problem with the illness
that we have is that over 95% of the
patients do not have antigen processing
correctly so that antibodies are made A
reduced fashion if at all when we look
at now what control do we have on
inflammation if the stimulus is not
stopped and it doesn't have to be
ongoing exposure it is now in this world
of antigen interaction with antigen
presenting cells and T lymphocytes that
has gone Ary and the illnesses that we
see become chronic because the antibody
formation does not occur now over the
years we knew about problems with
antigen presentation but now we know the
gene mechanisms behind defective antigen
presentation and the gene mechanisms to
not only include inflammation in our in
our venues but also abnormalities in
metabolism so if we look at metabolic
problems combined with inflammation we
have molecular
hypometabolism which is a fancy way of
saying that 95% of patients with chronic
fatigue have a specific abnormality and
inflammation and Metabolism that we can
show with genetic makeup and then with
Scott's work and my work we've been able
to show that we can correct the gene
activation when it's not supposed to be
activated and you correct Gene
suppression when it's not supposed to be
suppressed so what we're looking at is
the transcriptomic or Gene
representative theory of illness
causation and illness correction our
last paper and I hope you had a chance
to take a look at it but it's in your
inbox if you the next question is now
finally looking at to me the the holy
grail and that's correction of dieback
central nervous system degeneration you
may hear it called Alzheimer's you may
hear it called Parkinson's you may hear
that same called for an Tropic
myotrophic lateral sclerosis or ALS but
we are there we're there with Gene
activation and correction with our
therapies that have been developed over
the last 27 years okay so you're you're
going after an a host of immunological
diseases including extraordinarily
widespread conditions like Alzheimer's
Dr mcmah do you want to explain to
everybody what this has to do with where
they live so there are a number of
potential triggers that can cause the
innate immune system to activate and as
Dr Schumaker pointed out uh these people
or at least around 90% of them don't
have adequate or effective antibody
production to help mitigate when there
is chronic exposure so the innate immune
system is then basically left to handle
this by itself without the antibody
calvalry coming in and and reducing the
burden and if you are living or working
or going to school in a water damaged
building where there is increased
dampness or increased M microbial growth
from molds or bacteria or actina
bacteria or all of the above when you
inhale those your body recognizes those
as being foreign antigens and it's not
just for instance say mold spores it can
be old dead mold spores that have lost
their integrity their cell wall is
broken apart into hundreds of fragments
and in fact those fragments when you
inhale them go even deeper down your
respiratory tract into your lung and
again trigger the innate immune system
as response to that the innate immune
system will overproduce cyto kindes in
the same way that you would overproduce
cyto kindes if you got the flu or if you
got covid or some other kind of viral
infection and these fragments trigger
the inate immune system and the over
production of the cyto kindes and then
the cyto kindes cause the symptoms that
we commonly relate to with the flu which
could include headaches muscle aches
joint pains fatigue malays difficulty
sleeping coughing other respiratory
issues brain fog etc etc okay so let me
let me get the whole sequence of this
straight so what you guys have been
studying in is sometimes just and stop
me you know at any point if I get any of
this wrong sometimes people refer to
this as sick building syndrome you've
you've brought in conditions like
Alzheimer's and other immunological
diseases chronic fatigue syndrome I know
you've uh concentrated to some degree to
on uh
fibromyalgia so the idea is that there
are many buildings and we'll talk about
how many but there are many buildings
that Harbor Airborne pathogens mold
being first and foremost among them
perhaps apps that's much more likely in
buildings that have been water damaged
and not properly
remediated the consequence of that is
that if people are in those buildings
living in them or or working in them
that they're chronically exposed to
pathogens that can trigger an immune
response and some people when that
immune response is triggered they're not
producing antibodies in a proper manner
and there are genetic reasons for that
and possibly metabolic reasons as all as
well and and then is it the combination
of the pathogens that are in the local
environment plus the genetic weakness or
the metabolic problems that produce this
cyto kind storm that you associated with
flu like symptoms and pain and chronic
inflammation now and have I got all that
right is that is that the way this lays
itself out you're doing great keep on
that was excellent okay okay good so so
let's let's go through that one by one
then the first issue is then what
percentage of buildings in North America
and elsewhere in the world do you think
are suffering from this problem and if
it's a large number of buildings that's
obviously a catastrophe so what's the
evidence for this and why did you guys
become convinced of this what we have
seen is a
similarity of the
syndrome of acute exposure followed by
chronic exposure wherever the person
might live it's not confined to Florida
or Hawaii could be in in Nepal or could
be in in in in stutgart
this world wide exposure to an
environment that pretty much has 62 to
78 degrees year round no wind no rain no
change of the seasons indoors and the
mark of every one of these indoor places
is water intrusion so if we look to see
is there a water damaged building we
should be ble to find an ecosystem of
organisms now you mentioned fungi and
I've written books surviving mold and
mold Warriors out the best evidence of
the time and that was wrong we know that
fungi have a role but we also know that
endotoxins from bacteria are second on
the list and first is actino bacteria
and when you look at every building
that's water damage that has these
ecologic parameters you find the same
symptom
the same laboratory findings and now
that we have access to Gene evaluation
the same gene activation and the
likelihood that this would be due to
something else becomes a statistical
problem in some of Scott's work he's
published that the likelihood is You'
got a P value of less than p is less
than than one to the minus 50th power so
it could be the same in suit guard if
the was the same
but actually statistically the the idea
that it's not the same is so remote to
be
impossible okay so what Scott What
proportion of modern buildings first of
all is it modern buildings that are
particularly affected and and if not or
if so what proportion of buildings in
general are we talking about and Are
there specific kinds of buildings that
appear more susceptible I read in some
of the work of yours that I reviewed for
example that drywall seems to be a
particular problem so what what what
kind of how widespread is this problem
do you suppose and and what buildings
are particularly affected well the EPA
has published the the United States
Environmental Protection Agency has
published that at least 50% of the
buildings and up to 85% of the buildings
in the United States are historically
water damaged buildings that are
involved are not due to one era of
construction or another with modern
structure
put up quickly contractors investing
money he wants to turn over the house
sale quickly so he may not wait for a
master plumber to put in the bathroom
and a Plumbing Leak can develop
construction defects for new homes are a
real Bugaboo but even when we were in
Scotland and the castles from the 1200s
and before we saw the same kinds of
problems but in the older buildings
where they had not been paints used with
fungicides in them for example we didn't
find the same organ organisms making
toxins the way we do in the newer
buildings and about in 1970 when the
population got all upset with oil
embargos and houses were made to be
tighter we thought that that was the
reason for the problem it was actually
not because what we were using were were
paints and sealants to keep down mold
growth what we did was create natural
selection to kill off molds that could
be killed and if with the molds that
survived became toxin formers were
before they didn't so before
1970 it usually was a p a building that
was retrofitted or retro retrograde
corrected or modern construction the
safest buildings even though they're
water water damaged are the old
buildings with no paint okay so there
there's no specific form of building
that can be that's
amendable per se to to water damage and
the intrusion of toxins in in
consequence but you talk about buildings
after 1970 you said your first
hypothesis was these buildings were
arguably more dangerous because they
were more airtight as a consequence of
panic over uh declining fossil fuel
availability and I remember when people
started talking about sick building
syndrome I guess this is this went back
as far in my knowledge as far back as
the 80s they were concerned about these
hypers sealed buildings but you said
that your further investigations
revealed that it wasn't the ceiling of
the buildings per se so much as the use
of modern paints and sealants that had
antifungal chemicals embedded in them
now hypothetically the reason they put
those antifungals and anti- mold
chemicals in the paints was to keep the
fungus and mold down but you said or
you're implying I think you said
directly that the consequence of that
the unintended consequence of that was
that we produced molds and other toxins
that were more toxic rather than less as
a consequence of natural selection so
why did natural selection which was
obviously selecting molds and other uh
biohazards that could tolerate the
exposure to this poison why did they
become more toxic and what's your
evidence for that fungi also have
response to environmental hazards and
the environmental hazards of being
killed will cause AB normal activation
of genes in fungal species such that
they'll make toxins where beforehand
they didn't with the main role of of of
a moto toxin for example has nothing to
do with defense it has everything to do
with
predation uh that the fungus wants to be
eating a plant and the plant doesn't
want to be eaten so it'll release things
like a peroxidase and the fungi make
compounds to eliminate the fungi they
eliminate the peroxidase therefore
eliminate the plant defenses but it's
predation of of fungi on on it it prey
that's foremost where all this goes on
meanwhile actino bacteria love and
alkaline environment molds like an acid
environment and the alkaline environment
from antino is created by manufacturer
of substances that will kill off fungi
and change the pH of the drywall so that
as you see a initial building the
initial colonization will be with fungi
but it'll be replaced by actino bacteria
as time goes on but meanwhile if there's
a flood or hurricane event or natural
disaster the water saturation or aw as
the people should say Activity of water
will initially let in organisms that
like very saturated conditions or aw of
0.9 to its maximum of 1.0 or 100% so we
see one group of fungi of water damage
that's acute or different species will
be grouping of water damage that's less
acute and in the end then we'll see of
sources that have very dry buildings but
where the moisture has changed the
ecosystem now actino bacteria are famous
for creating most smell and
interestingly the musty smell or musty
odor we've long associated with fungal
in colonization is coming from
atinos geosman there are also
architectural uh design features that
make a building more likely to become
water damaged than others flat roofs are
more likely to leak than than pitch
roofs our basements and crawl spaces are
more likely to have water intrusions
than you would see in uh homes that are
built on a slab uh we know that that
drywall is more likely to have problems
than uh plaster on lathe and so there
are a number of different materials and
Architectural styles that can make a
house or a commercial building more
vulnerable or less right well you could
imagine you know when when I'm thinking
my paranoid thoughts I I know here
here's an example so one of the reasons
that the Roman Empire fell was because
the Romans used lead to seal their wine
empora and Lead is a known neurotoxin
and when we introduced lead into
gasoline to stop the gas from from or
our our internal combustion engines from
knocking we lowered the IQ of people
around the world by a substantial margin
it was really quite a catastrophe and
that was it was also the case that in
relatively low let's see in in house in
older houses that had used a plethora of
lead paint where the paint was allowed
to deteriorate and young children were
therefore ingesting lead paint powder
they were also impaired in terms of
their intelligence and also much more
likely to be antisocial and criminal and
so the reason I'm bringing this up is
because it's possible for a society to
introduce something into their midst
that's then distributed in an
extraordinarily widespread fashion you
know experimental vaccines come to mind
by the way and all of a sudden all sorts
of things that we didn't that weren't
understood about that thing that's being
introduced make themselves manifest and
it sounds like that's a case that you're
making for drywall is that it's an
extraordinarily light easy to work with
cheap building substance but it isn't we
don't have a lot of historical
experience with it it was introduced
very in a very widespread manner in the
latter half of the 20th century and so
and then you're saying that in
combination with the fungicides and so
forth that was put in the paint that we
put ourselves in a situation where we've
contaminated something approximating 50
to 80% of buildings so that's really
quite the bloody catastrophe so now
let's take that apart a little bit if
it's 50 to 80% of buildings how many of
them in your estimation are contaminated
to the point where that actually
constitutes a serious health problem
like you know I know that that's a
threshold issue but there's lots of
threats that people have to contend with
obviously and and if your house is
contaminated with mold and water damage
that's a big deal it's a really
difficult thing to fix or it can be and
so under what conditions should be
should people be prioritizing this as a
actionable risk factor and and how
widespread do you think this problem is
in its more serious forms study after
study has look at any individual
susceptibility which underlies who gets
sick and who doesn't the individual
susceptibility of the immune response
gen found chromosone 6 or
hladr was shown to be present in in just
about every person who had s and the
percentage of not having sers HLA but
having an illness is less than 5% of the
total so 95% were broken out into six
separate Hypes there are 54 available
and out of those six is 24% of the
population when we look at there
24% if we put them in exposure and
follow them prospectively we can show
that that the initial responses once a
priming event has taken place is
essentially 100% in those with
individual susceptibility we're seeing
this exactly with the same way with
covid covid creates an inflammatory
response it turns on an immune responses
which turns on Gene based susceptibility
so long covid has the same genetic
makeup and we've published a paper on
this in June of last year as well that
creates a new illness a new Target where
once wasn't before and we looked at
people who had were living in a building
and fine got covid got better from covid
but then that turned on the innate
immune response system that didn't stop
and lo and behold a month month later
two months later three months later they
had long covid syndrome when actually
what they had was a chronic inflammatory
and metabolic response syndrome it was
just a different initiator it could be a
a horde of of yellow jackets stinging
people at at a picnic creating
inflammatory response or it could be an
illness in this case covid fils the
bill last year because of you pre-born
network of clinics saved over 58,000
babies thank you to all who made this
possible let's celebrate these precious
babies when Charlotte found out she was
pregnant she was 7 weeks long in the
back of her mind she thought abortion
was the best solution she went into a
pre-born clinic and after hearing her
baby's heartbeat and seeing her
beautiful baby on ultrasound she chose
life her heart is filled with gratitude
for all of you who made this possible
each of these babies is truly miraculous
and every day pre-born celebrates 200
miracles just $28 can be the difference
between the life and death of a child
when a mother meets her baby on
ultrasound and hears that heartbeat it's
a Divine connection that doubles that
baby's chance at life let's join
together and help mothers choose life to
donate dial pound 250 and say the
keyword baby that's pound 250 baby or go
to preborn
docomo that's preborn dcom
Jordan okay okay so you could imagine
that
there's a a manner of conceptualization
that allows for two kinds of disease
processes there's disease processes this
that are associated with pathogens per
se and then there are disease processes
associated with an anti- disease
response or an immunological response
gone astray so if I'm following you
correctly we have a situation where
let's say 75% of our buildings are
contaminated and so 3/4 of the
population is exposed to the pathogens
that could produce an immune
hyperresponse but 25% of the population
in those buildings is particularly
susceptible to that because they have a
genetic predisposition to immune
overreaction in response to the specific
kinds of pathogens we're describing or
is that a more General susceptibility to
immune overreaction you're you seem to
be implying that in relationship to the
covid issue so so it's 25% of 75%
essentially is the number of people who
are hypothetically affected so that's
about
25% that's about 20% of people all
things considered might be experiencing
this as a serious problem so so have I
got that have I got all that right if
yes you do and you you picked it up very
quickly I thank you for that one of the
reasons that it's so important is we
look at illnesses that are s that
actually are s and add up who has
chronic fatigue syndrome who has fibromy
who has depression who's just getting
older because they're cognitive
effect children not doing well in school
is it the lead paint that they swallowed
is it the lead and the applesauce that
they've been they been taking in are
there environmental factors that are
creating this overall
systemic illness of which the brain is
the injury I worry most about in adults
Scotts these children more than I did so
we can let him speak about children's
with cognitive issues but the issue are
that when we look carefully at chronic
fatigue syndrome we find S and I'd like
you sir if you could to identify one
significant biomarker that distinguishes
fibromyalgia from not we have 30
biomarkers for sers and zero for
fibromyalgia why does fibromyalgia have
such a preponderance of people and how
many people adults have fibromyalgia 10%
add 3% for for chronic fatigue syndrome
how about postline syndrome how about
depress
boy we've got 25% all of a sudden and we
must start looking at those details we
can stratify sick versus non- sick cases
versus controls treat them and show that
cases equal to controls and they become
controls after treatment has
occurred okay so one of the things that
the non-medical listeners and Watchers
of this podcast might not know is that
there's a lot of overlap
in symptoms between different
hypothetically different illnesses and
so let's take depression as a case in
point now when I was assessing my
clients for depression the first thing I
always tried to figure out was are they
just ill because there's all sorts of
evidence associating depression
particularly with immunological
dysfunction and so I would inquire into
their sleep habits and their eating
habits and also their Associated health
conditions to find out if we could
because my sense was before we diagnosed
something as psychological we should
take a look and see if there's actually
something causing it and depression is a
relatively non-specific cluster of
syndromes now you're pointing to a whole
set of syndromes that have relatively
nonspecific symptoms some of them even
more difficult to diagnose and and
easier to be skeptical about in
relationship even to their existence as
say fibromyalgia and chronic fatigue Sy
syndrome right that's hard to dissociate
from General depression and anxiety and
and and a kind of global neuroticism or
even a
hypochondriasis now you're saying you
know your first claim is that 20% of the
population is likely to be experiencing
these symptoms but we don't see that
that we don't see this Sears chronic
inflammatory response syndrome in 20% of
people because essentially we're placing
them in the wrong bins now and so how
much of so let's walk through let's walk
through what the symptom constellation
is for chronic inflammatory response
syndrome that s and how you think we
should go about distinguishing that from
say fibromyalgia which is poorly
understood or chronic fatigue syndrome
which is poorly understood or depression
and and why do you think that your
category your category system which put
places all these people in the in the
box of chronic inflammatory response
syndrome why do you think that that's
preferable to the approach that's being
used by physicians now because I mean
you're making a lot of radical claims
here and I'm certainly not in a position
to dispute them but you know what they
say radical claims require radical
evidence and you're saying well first of
all that 80% of our buildings are in
serious trouble that 20% of the
population is suffering dreadfully as a
consequence and that there are genetic
pre dispositions to this and that many
many people with many other disorders
are fundamentally M misdiagnosed and
that this is actually the root cause of
their of their symptoms like including
absolutely devastating diseases like
Alzheimer's so so what is it let's go
through first of all what are the
symptoms that point to sers as far as
you're concerned and then what do you
use to prove that that's the condition
as Dr Shoemaker said we have roughly 30
biomarkers these are these are tests
which can distinguish ill people or or
what we call cases from healthy people
what we call controls we have roughly 30
of them and all of them have been
validated to show that they separate
cases from controls when we look at the
diagnosis of sers you have to have
objective evidence that shows that you
have several of these biomarkers you
know I mean at least four or maybe five
or more before you can actually even
make the diagnosis the statistical
likelihood of finding a healthy person
who had five abnormal biomarkers out of
the five we draw or the 10 that we
obtain is so small I mean it's in the
one to a million then when you start
looking at a larger group of people
maybe several people in the same home or
in the same office building or in the
same school when you start looking at
that and and each person's uh
probability of having those abnormal
biomarkers multiplies by the next person
and then multiplies by the next person
by the time you get to 10 people you
have such astronomically low probability
that this is a freak accident that it
can't be
dismissed what the I I think what the
main problem is and why this hasn't been
seen before in chronic fatigue patients
or irritable bowel patients or
fibromyalgia patients is because most
Physicians or many Physicians don't run
the tests that we do we looking
specifically at the innate immune system
as a possible root cause for these
different symptoms and if they ran the
tests that we do they would see the same
kind of data that we have my my data is
very similar to Dr shoemakers i' I've
seen roughly 2,000 patients 2,000 that
I've evaluated this for him it's much
more because he's been doing it much
longer than I have and our data is is
very similar okay so your argument
basically is and I just want to walk
through this very carefully so that
everyone listening understands is that
you've identified a number of biomarkers
you said 30 overall but apparently you
concentrate on something like 5 to 10
now there's a probability that any given
test is going to produce a result that's
positive falsely so someone will be
diagnosed as abnormal on that evaluated
Dimension but in truth not be abnormal
but that probability
declines as a function of the number of
tests administered so maybe there's a
one in 20 chance that any given test
will show that you have the condition
but there's a one in 400 chance that two
tests would show that and a one in 8,000
chance that three tests would show that
and so your case basically is that as
you accumulate evidence of the
biomarkers you decrease the probability
of a false diagnosis and there aren't
biomarkers as far as I know there aren't
there certainly aren't biomarkers for
depression so that's not not specific uh
what would you say physical or chemical
biomarkers you know there's sometimes
there's elevated cortisol or decreased
cortisol but it's very non the markers
are very non-specific so if you're
correct and there are specific
biomarkers for sers that implies that
that it can be more accurately diagnosed
than the other conditions with which it
might be confused and so what are the
what are the prime biomarkers that you
guys use to to make the diagnosis and
why did you pick those and how how valid
do you think they are and why we need to
start with a case definition the case
definition in 2003 that our group came
up with was modified in 2008 by the US
government accountability office when
they looked at the potential for
exposure this is what CDC used with
Feria back in 197
1996 he didn't get sick from a micro Alo
Bloom unless you're exposed to it so the
potential for exposure is number one
number two is symptoms the same or
similar to those seen in published peer
review literature the third element is
laboratory findings the same or similar
to those you in published literature and
then the fourth is objective response of
biomarkers to treatment so if we then
say what biomarkers have stood the test
of time back in in in 2000 it was trial
and error by finding HLA was an
explanation of why did some people get
sick and other people people didn't was
there a risk factor like cigarette
smoking or alcohol use or age or or
under kind illness with diabetes no no
no no it was based on genetic markers so
individual immune responses became our
first biomarker the actually the first
biomarker came from the EPA with Ken
hell been studying the neurotoxicologic
features of visual contrast
sensitivity which is a mechanism to see
an abnormal neurologic function of
vision contrast is one that's get
stabilized over time and is adversely
affected as velocity of flow of red
cells and retina neural Rim the optic
nerve head increases so VCS was our
first HLA was our next in that group
there was a regulatory neuropeptide
melanoid stimulating hormone which is
essentially negative in all cases and
normal in all controls and then with
treat treatment we saw Improvement in
msh not as much as what we wanted and
that was the impetus to keep on Scott
mentions cyto kindes in 1986 1985 was
the first publication of a paper on cyto
kindes and here we are in 1996
postulating that this cyto kind effect
could be huge and now if we fast forward
to covid It's a cyto Kind storm and
everyone in the drugstore knows what a
cyto kind storm is they're buying covid
tests they're looking for mechanisms
that we have been studing
and cine storms can are part of anate
immune response so you'll have it in
covid but you have it in C too and covid
doesn't have the same HLA that we know
of yet but we'll probably find it
doesn't have the same VCS and it's a
it's a sorting process so we took then
inflammatory markers TGF beta 1 no lab
was running that so I hired a lab to
prove that there was such a marker and
then we showed it the abnormal and
showed it in it its height with some of
the worst illnesses of all then we
treated it with medications that were
available over the counter or over with
with informed consent and then every
time we had reexposure here we came to
the prospective acquisition of illness
proof of causation we took people that
could have been sick from one building
fixed them all the lab micers were the
same and then with informed consent they
stopped all medicines and away the
suspect building three days nothing put
them back in the day in the building on
day one at the end of day one laboratory
findings changed day two laboratory
changes finding changed again day three
we had the exact syndrome of labs BCS
and symptoms prospectively proven upon
reexposure only no other choices could
have affected it wasn't depression in
three days it was s in three days
okay so so let me let me elaborate on
the story now so the biomarkers that you
described the first one which is a very
odd one I've taken this test by the way
and failed it and quite dramatically and
so there's an online test which is a
visual contrast sensitivity test and
basically what you're doing and stop me
if I get this wrong because it's been a
while is you're you're testing people
sensitivity to what visual Acuity in
relationship to closely
spaced lines on a on a diagram
essentially and you the hypothesis that
you're putting forward is that in the
presence of these inflammatory syndromes
retinal Acuity is compromised and I
don't understand the mechanism there but
that's basically the issue right so you
have an there is an online test visual
contrast sensitivity that people can
take um see it's a it's a strange test
because it seems like it's so far
removed from the symptom set that people
would be experiencing it's very
difficult for someone like myself I'm
scientifically trained you know and and
he and all of the stuff that I've
encountered as a consequence all of the
findings I've encountered as a
consequence of going through your
material have really come as a as a
shock to me this visual contrast
sensitivity test being one of them
because it's so far removed from the
symptoms that it's hard to believe that
there could be a relationship it almost
seems like Voodoo now you said that the
reason that this visual contrast
sensitivity test works is because the
retinal the retina itself is compromised
as a consequence of immunological
malfunction and so if I got that right
we have a objective parameter and that's
velocity of flow of red blood cells in
the r the rtina blood vessels and the
capillary beds as well as the neural R
the optic nerve head we can measure
objectively with a h highberg retinal
flow meter how fast red blood cells move
and they move more slowly if the
inflammatory respon response promotes
production of what are called adhesions
which is one mechanism to decrease flow
in an area of hyper inflammation and
treatment will be shown to improve flow
as the environmental stimulus is fixed
and is corrected with treatment so sick
patients you have reduced flow healed
patients have restorage the normal flow
to equal controls but reexposure here we
go prospective exposure again that's
this is how we determine risk in all of
medicine and science prospectively not
an association but with prospectively
reexposed people get the same findings
back again we fix them we get them back
to the same mechanism they were when
they were healed to equal to controls
this this in and out in and out and
constant answers to the critics how
could this possibly be true well here
are the data and if people want to argue
with with me they can argue with my data
okay so let let me elaborate on that a
little bit before I return to the
biomarkers per se so I know that the
closest tissue that's deeply analogous
to the brain itself is retinal tissue
and and so I I don't know if that's
relevant in this regard but it seems to
me that if what you're measuring with
the visual what does it mean you're with
the retinal with the visual Acuity test
visual Sensi it visual contrast
sensitivity test you're measuring
retinal dysfunction what are the
implications of that measured retinal
dysfunction for broader central nervous
system dysfunction or brain dysfunction
and does that lead us logically into a
discussion of degenerative neurological
conditions like Alzheimer's it does the
same mechanism of cyto kind response in
capillary beds is the same whether it
started with a fungus whether it started
with atino bacteria whether it started
with the flu but this innate immune
response is nonspecific in how it
responds but it will respond and we can
measure its tendency to re reoccur
regardless of where it happens it'll
happen in kidneys it happens in lung it
happens in liver and it happens in the
neural rim of the optic nerve head which
is the first part of the central nervous
system we've added countless additions
to that but that was the beginning that
was
1998 after studying this for for one and
a half years we finally had our first
biomarker that showed led the way to
cyto kindes we could separate with
treatment but by having treatment we had
the way around the Skeptics because I I
can say all right you use your Voodoo
medicine for a week and I'll use my
Voodoo medicine for a week we'll see who
Voodoo works better when yours doesn't
and mine does then I'm going to say I
win the battle right well that's
particularly powerful as you pointed out
in combination with evidence that you
can reinst the ill reinstantiate the
illness once treated with
reexposure cuz then you have direct
causality right instead of the weak sort
of correlations that often go to to H
hypothetically prove the existence of a
given condition okay so let let me get
this straight again so you have the
vision test you have HLA maybe you can
tell us again what that is U Mel was it
melatonin stimulating hormone and cyto
kind detection so that's four are those
the four Primary biomarkers Vision we
also saw you mentioned cortisol and
depression yeah we measured simultaneous
act and cortisol because lo and behold
there was
disregulation of act which is made by
the same set of of environmental and and
metabolic pathways in the brain they're
all melanocortin msh and act or
melan so if we have disruption of msh
we're going to have disruption of act
and cortisol can either follow in Step
which it often will or have create its
own marker so disregulation of act and
cortisol is one we found anti-diuretic
hormone doing the same thing people walk
around with chronic headaches they said
they had migraine they constantly but we
find out they were they were all
functionally dehydrated with elevated
osmolality and reduced ADH that was
another uh measurement we looked at at
pulmonary hypertens is a very common
cardiac condition is mistaken for
cardiovascular disease people are short
of breath and have chest pain with
exertion we think that it's from doing
to coronary disease when in fact we
measure the velocity of flow coming in
the the the force of the flow coming
from the right ventricle to the lung
that's reduced if the pulmonary pressure
is increased when we measure that we
find that over 60% of our cases have
pulmonary hypertension that's eluded the
cardiologist because they didn't do the
echo crram to show it and it hits just
one after another when we get to
genomics and I hope we'll have time for
today if not we should do this tomorrow
or another day the gene mechanisms are
the real gold mine for the researcher
and for the clinici
Alik have you ever heard of data Brokers
they're the middlemen collecting and
selling all those digital Footprints you
leave online they can stitch together
detailed profiles which include your
browsing history online searches and
location data then sell your profile to
a company that delivers you a targeted
ad no biggie right well you might be
surprised to learn that these same data
Brokers are also selling your
information to the Department of
Homeland Security and the IRS so to mask
my digital Footprints I protect myself
with expressvpn one of the easiest ways
for Brokers to aggregate data and tie it
back to you is through your device's
unique IP address which also reveals
information about your location when
you're connected to expressvpn your IP
address is hidden that makes it much
more difficult for data Brokers to
identify who you are expressvpn also
encrypts 100% of network traffic to keep
your data safe from hackers on public
Wi-Fi that's why I have the expressvpn
app downloaded on all of my devices
phone computer and even my home Wi-Fi
router all I do is tap one button to
turn it on and I'm protected it's that
easy make sure your online activity and
data is protected with the best VPN
money can buy secure your online data
today by visiting expressvpn.com
Jordan that's exp SS vpn.com Jordan and
you can get an extra 3 months free
expressvpn.com
[Music]
Jordan okay well I'll return to to the
genomics issue and don't let me forget
that if I if if we don't get there I
want to Okay so we've basically walked
through we've done a reasonable overview
of the biomarker space so let's do this
now let's let's talk about
behavioral and cognitive behavioral
emotional and cognitive symptoms like
what are people what are people who have
S going to experience in their
day-to-day life that they might confused
with chronic fatigue syndrome or or
depression or fibromyalgia for example
or or you said pulmonary hypertention as
well so what what are the fundamental
symptoms that people should be alert to
and do they differ in adults and
children well as we were talking about
decreased red blood cell flow to to the
optic disc you have to understand that
there's decreased red blood flow to
different places in the body not just to
the optic disc so for instance you know
peripherally as you look at the hands
and feet we'll see that there's reduced
Red Cell flow there too our patients
will often have cold hands or cold feet
or both they can have cramping in their
hands they can have pains in their hands
even sometimes discoloration you know
that looks like cyanosis and we see that
that goes away which treatment Dr
Shoemaker was talking about the lungs we
also need to talk about the brain the
brain will will also have a decreased
blood flow and Dr Shoemaker actually
demonstrated that in unpublished data
back in the late
2000s when he was doing Mr spectroscopy
and showed that there was an increasing
lactic acid in certain areas of the
brain and there was a abnormality in the
glutamate glutamine ratio both of which
suggested that there was hypoperfusion
or a reduction of that red blood cell
flow so why is that important well the
blood carries the oxygen and the sugar
the glucose that's necessary for for uh
production of energy at a cellular level
if you chronically reduce the amount of
oxygen that is getting to uh any cell it
will stop making energy as well and then
we get into genomics findings but what
we know is when you're not making enough
energy then you have to ration the
energy that you have and the cell will
underperform in in different areas and
so that will lead into brain fog and
potentially into cellular death which
can then lead into things like you know
dieback regeneration and the neurologic
illnesses now you you you
also how do you directly evaluate brain
State and brain function if I remember
correctly I mean I've been investigating
this with my daughter and my wife for
some time and some of the details are
unclear to me we've also had brain scans
specifically done to look for
neurological damage that might be
associated with this this uh exposure
and and sensitivity and so for everyone
who's watching and listening I mean I
might as well tell you why I'm
particularly interested in this I mean
there's a long-standing history of
depression in my family and my
suspicions are strong that it has a
physiological basis because first of all
it has a seasonal component and that
indicates something physiological right
off the bat but it's also associated
with a lot of immunological trouble
which seemed to culminate in this case
of my daughter who had endless numbers
of immunological problems and she's
treated a lot of those successfully with
a very restricted diet as have my wife
and I but she's become convinced more
recently that the cause of the food
sensitivity that's driving her
immunological conditions might be
associated might be attributed to
sensitivity to these biotoxins that Dr
Shoemaker and McMahon are talking about
and so well that's what we're trying to
track down at the moment because this
has been a multigenerational catastrophe
in my family and I would like to get to
the bottom of it and so we did some of
these neurological tests that did
indicate some some neurological damage
hypothetically as a consequence of toxin
exposure and so can you can you walk
everybody through those tests and what
they indicate and then maybe we could
talk a little bit about treatment before
turning to
genomics we skipped over symptoms you
asked a couple yes right yes let's pick
up that loose end before we hit into
neuroon and all that the Sy recording
that I did when I had visual contrast is
my only biomarker was compulsive logging
down of what symptoms the people have
maybe symptoms is that I elicited in an
interview wasn't a self uh form or
questioning the patient would fill out
it's the process of doing a medical
history that we're all trained to do in
in the four years of medical school or
longer if we if we specialized but
specifically fatigue and weakness were
nonspecific didn't have two with the
others aching and cramping unusual
cramping of the legs when you get spasms
at night time and get a charlie horse or
on the hands and was hard to extend
fingers because the muscles were in
spasm basically that was the end of of
of of circulation the fingers and the
toes were the end that's where the
accumulation lactic acid was greater so
that's where the muscle spasm was
respiratory issues cough shortness of
breath sinus congestion that was chronic
not related to Seasons necessarily uh
eye findings we'd have red eyes blurred
vision tearing sensitivity to Bright
Light with cough and shortness of breath
and difficulty with exertion we had lung
involvement didn't have a lot of speed
in production and the biomarker was
restricted lung disease not not
obstructive it wasn't asthma was called
asthma by some but it's not it's
restrictive abdominal pain secretory
diarrhea vomiting nausea also present
joint problems soreness stiffness first
thing in the morning and throughout
after sitting in a chair for two hours
the cognitive issues were there uh
difficulty with memory difficulty with
assimilation of new knowledge difficulty
with
concentration difficulty with with
disorientation the executive cognitive
functions are six hypothalamic system we
had change in appetite change in in in
in weight suddenly and weight gain out
of the blue change in uh sweats and
night sweats especially change in BIO in
temperature regulation those are all the
msh related things so let me ask you a
technical question about that so I mean
when when you're going through that as a
psychologist so what I would think would
be helpful in relationship to that
diagnosis would be to make a list like a
questionnaire of all you you listed off
about 40 symptoms I think that's about
how many you covered so you could
imagine that you had people fill out a
questionnaire and then you could
associate each questionnaire item with
the with the biomarkers and you could
find out which of the symptoms were
Cardinal with a factor analysis have you
guys done any questionnaire development
that's oriented towards symptom
identification yes every person that
takes their visual contrast test will
undergo a symptom analysis and a symptom
discussion and we look to see if there's
cluster analysis a statistical function
of saying yes or no based on visual
contr contrast and symptoms alone
without any of the other biomarkers just
statistically we can tell you
98.5% likelihood of s just on VCS and
symptom clusters it's incredible No One
Believes it until they take it and they
say my god well my symptom cluster is
gone from eight down to six down to four
you're halfway there we want you down to
one have you done a factor analysis of
the of the symptoms by any chance yes it
was published in 2006 okay okay okay all
right all right all right so we've
covered symptoms now there's about 40 of
them we covered biomarkers what and we
we talked a little bit about illnesses
that are hypothetically attributable to
that but let's go through that in some
more detail what common illnesses now I
I don't remember if you if it's you guys
or not but I read a paper here recently
while I was doing background research
that showed that there's a much higher
risk than in most countries in Finland
for the development of of Alzheimer's
and that that was associated in this
paper with a particularity of if I
remember correctly a Finnish
architectural design that made their
houses more susceptible to these
biotoxins that you describe and that's
produced a statistically significant
increase in the rate of Alzheimer's in
in Finland was that your work I got that
right I'm I'm familiar with that work
all I want the Finish people to show is
that treatment will correct the
abnormalities and then create the
correct the Alzheimer's by the time it
gets to be Alzheimer's we're 20 years
late we can pick up the difficulties of
tubu in a4a and
tub1 uh in in Al On A congenital basis
we can identify that very young ages
certainly the time we've got people when
when when when grandma's getting trouble
with her her cognition we think it's old
age her problems got started when she
was 30 and 40 recognizable then and all
all the other Scott I've been manipul
talking too much your turn have you guys
ever tried a verbal fluency test by any
chance because verbal fluency seems
quite susceptible to disruption by well
there's certain forms of neurological
degeneration that interfere with veral
fluency quite dramatically and it might
be a good marker for cognitive for
cognitive interference they're very easy
to administer Lyn Gren public from
University of Maryland published on
Feria the neurocognitive abnormalities
verbal processing was one of the panel
they had that was published in the
Lancet in 1998 we worth taking a look at
I don't have your skills but uh she did
and uh those abnormalities were
found when you neuros pychological
testing of patients the the two most
common abnormalities that I see are
deficits in working memory and deficits
in processing speed overall and one of
the complaints that we very commonly see
is that people are still able to do the
functions of their job it just takes
them much longer than it used to so what
they used to be able to wrap up an hour
three or four hours which right
relatively unproductive and eventually
end up on disability see that's why
verbal fluency might be a real useful
marker because it's a time test right
how many words can you write down that
begin with the letter s in 3 minutes and
so it it's because it's a speeded test
it might exactly pinpoint that
interference with with ongoing process
processing say rather than long-term
memory or crystallized intelligence so
that's that's really why it's spr well
that's why it's spraying to mind well
it's also an unbelievably easy test to
administer and there's wide individual
variability and it' be very interesting
to see if that was associated with the
genomic markers that you described and
maybe we could we could turn to those
now um and then I want to delve a bit
more into you know the the we we brushed
over this very quickly the idea that the
symptoms that culminate in Alzheimer's
decades later can be detected decades
previously I know for example by the way
this is another reason the verbal
fluency test popped into mind I know
there was a study of nuns they looked at
their writing samples from when they
were in their 20s and they could tell by
an analysis of verbal fluency which nuns
were most likely to develop Alzheimer's
in in old age it's the longest long we
study yeah exactly so another reason
verbal fluency might be an interesting
marker so okay now and we just so I
wanted to go in two directions One
Direction was okay yeah what is the
panoply of neurological degenerative
neurological conditions that you think
are likely to be associated with
sers we didn't have a assumption based
discussion about symptoms and
neurological abnormalities that we
thought were for Serv we had recorded
executive cognitive function we recorded
Tremors we recorded metallic taste
dizziness vertigo Tremors but we didn't
have any way of assessing what was going
on with the brain we couldn't measure
abnormalities and brain along in 2007
comes neuroquant and neuroquant with one
MRI image can look at 11 different
volumes that we then could could start
to correlate with parameters and by
2015 uh Scott and I had both published
papers looking that there were
reproducible abnormalities in neuroquant
in C patients and with treatment we can
fix those but the beauty in
2017 was we could actually fix
multinuclear atrophy so our treatment
was non-specific non degenerative but
instead of just fixing the hippocampus
we were fixing hippocampus amydala and
Cate we were fixing pal we were fixing
of the mean number of of abnormalities
was 3.4 out of six and we could fix
those to equal to controls 0.9
abnormalities cases equal controls so
neuroquant early on became of interest
but the final change was neuroquant
associated with
genomics and and before we go there I
should just mention that there's there's
a pattern of damage that we see in the
brains of people that have chronic
inflammatory response syndrome in fact
there's more than one if if you
developed your chronic inflammatory
response syndrome as a result of water
damaged buildings we tend to see that
the forbrain parena will be swollen we
see that or enlarged I should say we'll
see that the cortical gray matter will
be enlarged and that the Cotate nucleus
will be atropic will be smaller if you
develop chronic inflammatory response
syndrome as a result of of Lyme disease
and post post- treatment Lyme disease
syndrome we see a completely different
pattern and and that pattern is that the
right thousand is enlarged and that the
putam is is smaller and atropic and we
showed that on two different studies and
then in the third study that Dr Shumaker
and I published together looked at
different treatment and when we used Dr
shoemaker's treatment protocol up to the
next to the last step we saw that the
for br parena that had previously been
enlarged and the cortical gray that
previously been enlarged came back to
control uh values but we didn't see
Improvement in in the uh in the
multinuclear atrophy
the next paper though did and that was
with use of of VIP baso active
intestinal poly peptide which is a
substance that your body makes and is
key for um it's it's an
anti-inflammatory peptide it's a neuro
regulatory peptide that brings your
activated immune system back down to
normal when it's appropriate to do that
and so with VIP therapy which Dr Shaker
Pioneer we have seen Cate nucleus and
multinuclear atrophy either stopping or
reverting back toward normal have you
guys used that same treatment protocol
for conditions like Alzheimer's or other
degenerative neurological diseases
obviously there's an overlap there which
we've discussed or hypothetically
there's an overlap there with cers has
anybody been looking at the application
of this particular treatment protocol to
to these degenerative neurological
diseases yes we published one study just
in a few few weeks ago but what we
didn't have was looking at people that
were untreated or stage one patients
compared to stage two which is treated
with the first part of the protocol
stage three treated with VIP but stage
four that's where we had the the off VIP
and and and doing well we had a
reduction of the basic mechanism of
dieback CNS degeneration looking at
changes In Tua for a
44% reduction in 3 months that's not
been published yet but it's high on our
list but yeah I bet it's high on your
list yeah it's it's like we've we we've
we've got to get going on this one there
are other things that other people are
doing or aware this is a complex field
and no no one illness parameter will fit
fit everybody but if you've got the
microtubular
dysfunction that we add a alluded to
with tuba4a and Tubb tubb1 if you have
that as a marker and you have cognitive
issues and you use and you respond to
VIP the reduction is 44% that's just in
in three months of work okay so I would
like to take this in two directions now
and we've got about half an hour left in
this segment although we can run a
little longer if if you know if if that
seems appropriate I want to know about
you know what people should do you know
what constitut treatment and so that
would be building testing building
remediation and then the interventions
that you described but I would also like
to talk about I know Dr Shoemaker that
you and Dr McMahon have brought this
problem to the attention of government
officials and I believe particularly in
relationship to military housing but not
only that so let's start with everybody
who's listening to this is going to be
thinking well I know people who have
this cluster of symptoms you know what
in the world should I do about it so so
let's talk we had our houses mold tested
um and you know the results were rather
dismal and I'm not exactly sure what to
do about that because I have properties
now that appear to be quite mold
saturated and you the step after that's
not exactly clear one of them was just
remodeled and I'm not that inclined to
bloody well do the whole thing again you
know but that's partly why I'm
investigating this to the degree that I
am but what is it what are the steps
that people should take in order to
determine F first of all that they have
this problem and then and then in order
to do something about it we first need
to make sure the patient satisfies the
case
definition if they don't satisfy the
case definition serves this this doesn't
apply okay but if you satisfy the case
definition then we want to define the
ecological parameters within the
building if the building is water
damaged and it should have fungi but
doesn't and you don't test for actino
bacteria you've made a mistake but if
you don't have fungi is that because you
never had them or is it because it's
overrun with with actino bacteria that
are making the drywall surface alkaline
and fungi don't live very well and then
if that's not the case what about the
water saturation with endotoxins because
of the three things that cause the
greatest amount of damage to the brain
endotoxins lead the list the
specifically for every abnormality that
we find in the gene uh that that shows
us about specific causation that's the
the building contractor's word specific
causation for endotoxins we've
identified in neuroquant we've also
identified in combination with the genie
testing or genomic testing so the two go
together but then we want to know do you
have endotoxins do you have vtin
bacteria do you have fungi and you can
do that on one dust sample collected at
home by someone who can put a glove on
one hand and wipe a Swiffer cloth in One
Direction over 10 to 30 surfaces that
are horizontal above the floor and send
that off to a lab that's reputable the
licens it's not a Fly by Night insure
and Sh your organization but you there
there are those that are out there they
really are but specifically if we've got
a reputable lab that shows us the
abnormalities you've Define the illness
parameters you divide the environmental
parameters now we Divine the treatment
do you want to go for treatment Scott
sure the first part of treatment is
taking care of the exposures so if
you're living in a home that's water
damaged or uh or if it's your workplace
or maybe it's school that you're
attending you need to either fix that
remediate that or or leave that the most
important step of any kind of
treatment for any kind of immunologic
illness is getting away from exposure
that is the most important step is
probably the most difficult step for
many people Al right expensive and it's
it's mindbending and and as there is a
certain variation in knowledge of this
illness amongst Physicians there is also
a variation in knowledge of this illness
of amongst mold testers and mold remedi
ERS too so you want to make sure that
you're working with somebody that has
stood the test of time and actually
knows to some degree about this illness
but that is the most important step the
the Second Step that that we initiate
for almost all patients is uh the use of
a binder and there are different kinds
of binders uh Dr Shoemaker pioneered the
use of
cholestyramine and uh and Chisum also
known as well well call they are very
effective and typically we will see
improvements within two to three months
if you can get that first step taken
care of there are a host of other people
that will use other what I would
consider less effective binders like
charcoal and okra pepsin and
um different kinds of Clays and things
like that I find in my experience that
those work but they take much longer and
most people would like to get better
faster so we use the more aggressive
therapy after you go through those two
steps and we see that you're improving
usually your VCS test that was
previously negative is now positive uh
or is is normal we usually draw some
blood work to look at the tests that you
had previously that were abnormal and
based on which ones continue to be
abnormal the rest of the therapy is is
is follows Dr Shaker protol and what's
called the pyramid and we just go up the
pyramid and when we've gone through all
of those steps and and corrected or
attempted to correct the various
different systems of inflammation that
we're still causing abnormalities in the
lab test after that we contemplate
whether usage of intranasal VIP is
useful for most patients it is certainly
in my experience if you have not
recovered at least 70% of your energy
70% of your cognitive ability 70% of of
your exercise tolerance if you haven't
recovered those from the rest of the
therapy then it's time for VIP it said
if you have or haven't if you have not
so I'm anticipating every one of my
patients will recover at least 70 and up
to
90% of their previous function previous
capability if they can follow the
protocol as as I just outlined okay so
I've been trying this colestyramine and
so what I've found with it and this is
still tentative conclusion on my part
but um first to begin with it seemed to
make my symptoms quite a bit worse even
at a relatively low dose and then I
moved the dose up and down for a while
and I seemed to find a dose that wasn't
disturbing me so what it was doing to me
was producing symptoms of psychomotor
slowing so it was harder for me to do
things I was thinking more slowly I had
more pain especially in the morning um
more depressive mes n none of which as
you obviously know is particularly
Pleasant and if I decreased the dose
enough that went away a week ago I
increased the dose again and then those
symptoms came back and so why why I know
that that's not uncommon that return of
symptom and that that means that the
dose should be decreased but that
obviously makes treating this even more
complicated because when you first start
start using the binder it can make
what's wrong with you worse so why does
the B what does the binder do and why
might it why might it be the case that
it would make symptoms worse and who
would be susceptible particularly to
that worsening of symptoms when we have
intensification which is the word that I
used for people who got worse when they
took
hyamine we found that
pre-treatment usually with compounds
that would reduce inflammatory response
reduced cyto kindes pre-treatment with
say five to seven days and then
restarting colestyramine
at low dose for another five to seven
days increase the dose five or seven
days and at the end of the month you get
up to full full dose of colestyramine
and you go off the the extra medications
omega-3 fatty acids are are widely used
for this they work very nicely Actos was
a beautiful drug it's got an FDA Black
Box on it for another reason but that's
still available
uh and is for people that are worse now
most commonly when people intensify
there are either two problems
pre-existing we would know in if we had
done the evaluation if you have a
multiply antibiotic resistant coagulate
negative staff colonizing your nose not
infecting your nose not creating
symptoms but colonizing your nose and
you treat with binders there can be
intensification because this organism
makes a tox a polycystic ether toxin po
polycyclic ether toxin that is released
when it's Disturbed in its ecosystem and
there's a binding coefficient looking at
other toxins that are bound to a
receptor and that when they start
pulling the toxin off with
cholestyramine binding it in the gut
there will be a response of the receptor
to suddenly release all cyto kindes that
are bound and so you you frequently will
create a cyto kind storm now the
Paradigm illness for this is post lime
syndrome post lime syndrome if you've
got Lyme disease and the diagnosis is
difficult to to prove but specifically
you pre-treat pre-treat with Omega-3s
for five days start lowd dose chyam and
way you go now for other people who
don't have marchons and who don't have
lme disease we found the paradoxically
the last step or
VIP can be used in lowdose is micro
doses as the first step and this is from
the the textbook that Scott and I wrote
on the Art and Science of s medicine
it's called the low vids Pro VIP
protocol and we can start people on that
get through the intensification decrease
the the VIP increase the cholestyramine
or well call and people Sail on but
they've got to be willing to take things
slowly and defeat the intensification
monster because it is horrible it is
absolutely horrible having experience it
myself so what does it mean for
people so you know when I'm
contemplating this and and contemplating
doing something about it I'm wondering
well you know what what's the
implication here for for travel for
visiting other people so Howes I mean I
already almost eat nothing which makes
me you know an annoying guest in many
ways and now you know
the if I'm sensitive to these sorts of
toxins that also means that in principle
it's going to be more difficult for me
to travel and to visit people and if you
recover if you're in a clean environment
and you recover and you use the
treatment protocol that you describe
what does that do in terms of people's
you know relative long-term resistance
assuming they're not living in an
absolutely mold saturated house if msh
levels don't rise which is the most
common
situation the S susceptibility has not
changed because your HLA has not changed
with low msh if you get re go somewhere
to a hotel or an airplane and you
reacquire marchons because they're
ubiquitous in the environment and the
Maron starts to grow you will relapse
and recres with your symptoms within
three days folks who travel extensively
like I used to will be on medications on
a prophylactic basis and take them on a
regular basis I have a uh room sanitizer
that I that I use when I travel and I
would go to the hotel room and plug that
in clean out the hotel room because
whether the kind of heating devices they
might have in the corner underneath the
window that has some humidity coming out
for to try to keep up with with Heat or
the cool air cooling system but hotels
are notoriously with carpets next to
bathrooms and kids playing the bathroom
oh let's let's play uh let's let's play
hockey and and saturate the rug and you
don't know it was there saturated a week
ago and you walk into it it looks fine
but you were basically re-exposing
yourself it means that you need to
manipulate your environment as best you
can as your first guess but then you
need to take medication on a regular
basis fortunately the side effects of
lowd dose VIP are essentially zero so
that's a way you can live as far as a
carnivore diet as you reduce the
inflammatory result of using veggies and
other things that are not carnivore food
you will find that VIP is your good
friend and it is will be something
helpful to let you expand your diet once
you have re achieved the the maximum
medical improvement from the Conor diet
do you think this is a slight sideways
move and I won't pursue it for long but
do you think that there's any
association between sers and the Obesity
epidemic oh my goodness you describing
leptin def leptin resistance leptin is
made by gp130 cyto receptor in the brain
right in the hypothalamus where msh is
involved and leptin must bind to its
receptor send off
a stat one signal to turn on production
of PC Pro opio melanocortin to make msh
so if you're LEP and resistant because
of weight problems you don't turn on msh
and so that by itself will turn on
fatigue uh pain and then now obesity and
what a Triad and a good day a good month
a good month for a leptin resistant
patient not to mention an insulin
resistant patient on an msh deficient is
half a pound per month that's not a good
day wow wow well okay so so so what do
you think about this okay well you know
I've been reviewing the statistics
lately not only with regard to the
prevalence of obesity let's say in the
United States but also to its rate of
increase and the last projection I read
was something like 40% of Americans will
be grossly obese morbidly obese by the
year 2030
40% you know and that's that well it's
impossible to overstate what a
catastrophe that is that's half of Sur
patients if you look at someone who
weighs 300 pounds we're not going to use
pedantic terms like morbidly obese yeah
yeah yeah specifically when weight's a
problem what's left in what are ATP pyto
kindes doing what's in doing and more
importantly what's molecular
hypometabolism doing because we've got a
prescription now we've been using it
that will defeat the mechanisms the
physiologic mechanism for weight storage
and fat storage we looked at at at the
OC cytoid and and brown fat and we
wanted to turn on Brown fat on coupling
protein one two and three were found it
used to be just one but I'm coupling one
two and three are found we can convert
beige fat to Brown fat and have
increased metabolic consumption of
energy by turning on Brown fat
activation this is one of the advantages
from Finland again here we we heat you
up and you have a nice sauna and then we
we T to let you go out and jump into a a
snow bank we Y without making shivering
that turns on Brown fat physiology that
turns on energy production like crazy is
wasting heat non shivering thermogenesis
is what that is okay how how many papers
have you two published between you that
are related specifically to this topic
approximately over
360 okay okay so we two together we're
60 okay okay so 60 papers all right so
you've brought your findings to the
attention of various government bureaus
what has been what has been what have
you delivered in terms of reports what
has been the consequence of that whole
lot of nothing well I had the privilege
of of speaking before adjuncts of the
House and Senate art and services
Committee in December of
2019 and then they made a report to the
full Congress and 16 days later they
appropriated $300 million to look into
military housing particularly as it as
it pertained to uh troop Readiness and
and suicide in the military and you
probably didn't hear about that because
the next day they uh impeached president
Trump for the first time and when that
news cycle was over we had this little
thing called covid and then after that
it's like everybody seems to have
forgotten yeah well I I I read big
chunks of that report and my conclusion
was that the people to whom you
presented this report regarded your
findings as credible and three like I
can't imagine how you could spend $300
million testing military housing I mean
that's an insane amount of money but but
it does indicate regardless of that it
does indicate that they took what you
were pointing out seriously what did you
find in relationship to military housing
and what and what do you think the
consequences of that are for let's say
military Readiness and for the mental
and physical health of the serviceman
but the people that that I was meeting
with had visited a number of mil milary
bases and had seen the military housing
so they were already aware of the rad
and uh infestations and and the the mole
growing on the walls and whatnot I mean
they'd seen it with their own eyes what
I presented was that this was definitely
causing problems with troop Readiness uh
even even when the GI is living there
and going and and being deployed just
being aware that your family is living
in that and that your family is getting
sick and chronically fatigued and and
your children are having cognitive
issues and and uh chronic headaches and
chronic stomach pains that local
pediatricians will usually say are are
psychological
symptoms because they don't know what
biomarkers to check for if they did
they'd find that somewhere between 80
and 90% of those children both with
chronic headaches and chronic stomach
problems that they really have S and
it's treatable and it can be reversed
very quickly yeah well it's not it's not
uncommon for the patient psychological
problems to be a direct consequence of
the fact that they've been misdiagnosed
by a physician you know like I was
always extremely loath in my practice to
attribute any serious physiological
alterations to psychological condition
you know because it just strikes me as
highly unlikely and so it's very easy to
assume that if you don't know how to
diagnose something it's a consequence of
the Mal malfunctioning psych psyche of
your of your patient or your client and
that's an easy thing to fall into I
don't want to be cynical about this
that's an easy thing to fall into if
it's also associated with let's say
depression and anxiety because those are
pretty non-specific symptoms of most
psychological conditions right and and
depression which is essentially a
pain-like condition and anxiety are very
easy to attribute to psychological
factors even though they have a profound
underlying psychophys I olcal substrate
so you know I can I can feel I can I
have some sympathy for the Physicians
but but it's all too easy to attribute
an illness to someone's malfunctioning
psychological processes this might be
particularly relevant with kids I
understand Dr McMahon you've spent a
fair time looking into the problem of s
with children so maybe we could just
touch on that
briefly yes at this point I've seen
about a thousand children uh for that uh
for for 28 years I had my own private
practice where I worked with a nurse
practitioner uh in the last 10 years I
evaluated the children there that had
chronic illnesses for Serv also and
found that again the majority of
children that had chronic headaches and
and we're talking 10 million children in
the United States alone the majority of
those the the large majority they had
sers when I evaluated them for that and
when I treated them for that their their
headaches would either go away or they
would become much less severe much less
frequent it's the same with with chronic
abdominal pains I was taught in
residency and I and I went to a
fantastic residency but I was taught
that that stomach pains that were
recurrent in children maybe 10% of the
time you can make a diagnosis of you
know urinary tract infections or
constipation or you know maybe there's
some visceral problem with their liver
or some other organ in their abdomen but
that the majority of times that the
children were actually
seeking either a primary or a secondary
gain and that psychological but what I
saw in my patients when I started
evaluating them for S is that about 90%
outside of that 10% so we're talking
closer to 80 81% of these patients had
four or more biomarkers for sers and
then when we treated them their
abdominal pains either went away
completely or became much less frequent
and much less severe so I mean really
fundamental game Cher these are two of
the most common visits for pediatricians
is children with chronic headaches
children with chronic abdominal pains
there's another 10 million who have
chronic abdominal pains I and then you
can also expand that to adults because
the number one reason in my reading for
a visit to your primary care physician
is chronic stomach pains which are
considered functional in most adults
they actually have a term functional
abdominal pain syndrome and again if you
were doing the correct testing looking
at the inative in system again my
experience is about 90% of those people
with this functional pain will have the
biomarkers consistent with the diagnosis
of c and then treatment you know just
follows the
law um Dr Shoemaker you you insisted
earlier in the discussion that we
returned to the issue of genomics and
and genetic susceptibility and so I
don't feel that we've covered that in
quate depth so do you want to expound on
that for a moment or two and so for
everyone watching and listening so the
the causal pathway is an affected
building that's a building affected by
water damage that's increased the
probability that that will be
problematic is increased if it's
drywalled and that the and the drywall
is also sealed or painted with an
antifungal chemical and then that isn't
sufficient altogether to produce the
syndrome you also need a person who's
susceptible and that's about 25 % of
people and they're susceptible for a
variety of physiological and genetic
reasons and so we're going to delve into
the genetic markers for a moment and and
the the the genomics aspect of that so
Dr Shoemaker you want to take that away
when we look at the role of
metabolism in this illness it it's was
been under underst stud for years but
now it's it's risen to the head of the
cream of the crop the structure that
makes
proteins and there's a million of these
in every cell it's called a
ribosome and if you remember your high
school biology ribosomes make proteins
and mitochondria make
energy but the mechanism of protein
production comes from
RNA copied in off of DNA and traveling
from the nucleus into the cytoplasm of
the cell and that messenger RNA gives a
signal to the ribosome to assemble one
amino acid at a time a given Protein
that's coded for by the RNA so DNA
message transcribed to RNA transcribed
to RNA makes a
protein what happens in chronic
fatiguing illnesses is that the
structure they call the sarsen Ricon
Loop and this getting a little little
con little comp complicated here is
presentent every living creature every
every creature known to God has got a
sarson rice and loopin and at the one
point the 15 nucleotide where there's an
adenosine moyy a toxin can cause
replacement or or elimination of that
one PL adenosine and the loop won't work
so suddenly a million ribosomes losing
half a million of its capability won't
make the protein needed for cell
function and the cell stops functioning
normally meanwhile glucose is being
driven into the cell by two Transporters
and there air glycolysis or breakdown of
glucose the six carbon chain Circle or
chain excuse me circular compound is
broken into two three carbon fragments
in a chain called pyrovate pyrovate must
be delivered across an outer membrane of
the mitochondria to get into the m m the
middle membrane across the inner
membrane to get to the cycl oxygenase
pathway to make energy so if you don't
get pyrovate going into the nucleus you
don't make the 36 ATP or 38 ATP the
nucleus can break so Otto warberg
studied this in 1928 in 1955 he finally
passed away but he studied cancer and he
found that pyate was readily available
but it was not being metabolized in the
mitochondria it was being broken down
from pyate a three carbon chain into
lactic acid a three carbon chain the
lactic acid was secreted outside the
gradient into the capillary beds and
lactic acidosis became common we see
this proliferative physiology of lactic
acidosis in 85% of our cers patients we
have
ribosomal attack on protein we've got
lack of proper energy metabolism going
on but at the same time in addition to
metabolic acidosis will have lack of a
regulatory te- cell population thymus
derived te- cells we have increased gray
matter nuclear atrophy we'll get
pulmonary hypertension we'll get here
here's your obesity we'll get insulin
resistance you get five complications of
metabolism abnormality in 95% of the
patients whove got molecular
hypometabolism that is prescription for
a disaster so we start looking at
insulin receptor substrate to that will
increase delivery of glucose regardless
of what the diet has it in involved a
lot of people will be on a diet called a
keto diet with keto diets they want to
make themselves burning fat well if
irs2 is increased then that keto doesn't
get into the the cell it'll be turning
on uptake of glucose so you wasted the
keto function if virus 2 is elevated so
if you're going to get a serious about a
diet and and the the carnivore Diet also
gives tremendous source of glucose
remember aspirate and glutamate are
broke down in glucose very quickly when
your energy is low and so that protein
wasting goes along the carnivore diet if
irs2 is up and having done a little bit
of work with carnivore diet I would just
urge people to know what your irs2 is
before you stop eating all all
carbohydrates but secondarily we start
seeing
disruptions of of apoptosis this is
programmed cell death where cell should
die normally being the fragments of
cells be coated with membrane released
into the circulation but not causing
inflammation but here in this illness
with apoptosis we have defective
apoptosis where the cell is lice without
cating of the internal fragments that
are antigens so we get now a surge of
antigen load in bloodstream with
apoptosis and someone who's got
defective apoptosis genes rpk1 we can
tell you that and that will create an
endogenous source for sers I realized it
getting a little technical but we look
at coagulation factors these genes are
upregulated like crazy and they will
bind to TA and T beta in in the brain
and then create a microclot which will
lice you know micro bleed and that's
where Alzheimer's gets it start but
begins with extra coagulation factors
cyto kindes we mentioned the tremendous
increase in cyto kindes we also
mentioned there's specific causation for
endotoxins there's are three markers
that we use in addition to environmental
samples for ACT actino bacteria we use
tgfbr1 and two that will turn on
fibrosis is a way to tell about actino
injury and then we look at map cyesis
that does its own bad things being
turned on by by atino bacteria fungi
we'll have apop is and then you'll have
the findings in the in the in the brain
stem so all of these findings and
there's more honestly there's it's it's
it's been a two-hour lecture yeah
lessons from Genie available on free
downloads from surviving World website
you just take a look you don't have to
pay a doctor and you can just get it
read yourself let me ask you let me ask
you a question about the is there an
association between the genetic markers
that interfere with cell oposisi and
susceptibility to alzheimer's does
anyone know that what we have shown is
that the susceptibility is separate the
the cytoskeleton or micral genes Tu a4a
and dubb1 that's the one associated with
dieback loss remember every neuron of
every eukarion has got a cell body
connected to a series of tubes called an
axon the tubes convey ions and nutrients
that must get from the cell body down to
the end of the road the axon to the
synapse energy demands like crazy you've
got to maintain a gradient a sodium
potassium that costs energy but if the
microtubules are disrupted as there are
in dieback neuropathy what you will see
is loss of this neuron and then the next
neuron the next neuron is going on
meanwhile coagulation is going on and
you're getting the vascular phenomenon
that leads to cognitive impairment
they're both going at the same time and
if you don't have blood supply bringing
energy in to the already damaged nervous
system it just piles up it is a positive
feedback loop of abnormalities in blood
flow abnormalities in energy flow
abnormalities can be identified in Genie
now we were talking about the government
I just want to remind you that in 2004
John Conor's convened a special session
of Congress uh Sharon Kramer was the
contact person and she's been a real
real fighter on all these years for mold
rights for mold patience and all that
she's the one that first blew the
whistle on military housing problems
around the
norfol energy base and3 billion dollar
later that those lawsuits have been
settled but along the way Sharon also
ran blew the whistle and Ted Kennedy's H
committee health education and labor
committee sent a group of Physicians
including me down to New Orleans to look
to see what happened with Katrina and
Rita and they're most of new orans this
is in February 2006 was still underwater
and as moldy as can be and femal is
doing things but we had a a ship the
Scotia Prince was our control gr none of
these people have been in in involved
with neurons in any way but they were
there and
our taking controls for the group and we
had people being St stashed on the boat
they were from Firemen they were from
children there are homeless people
people from St Bernard Parish and I had
a case control study I did over the
weekend always did was was symptoms and
visual contrast on 250 patients and we
showed distinct markers if you had more
than five symptoms you were a case was
incredible with that report was released
to St Bernard Parish on a Monday it was
taken down on Tuesday and that's the
last I've heard of it well it's not
surprising as far as I'm concerned
because if this problem is as severe and
as
widespread as you describe then it makes
the asbest problem look trivial by
comparison person and you know takes a
long time to kill you from asbest mold
just makes you feel like you want to die
right yes yes right right well but it's
so unbelievably prevalent and it's so it
I mean you lay out very carefully what
the treatment course is but it's it's
certainly it's a complicated and
life-altering process
to undergo the diagnosis the house
remediation which can be expensive and
then the lifestyle and other alterations
that would be necessary to bring this
under control and if it's as widespread
and severe as you claim it's no wonder
that there's tremendous resistance let's
speak about that to maybe bring this to
a close you guys have been hard at this
for quite a long time and you said some
60 papers published which is quite a
substantial that's for everyone watching
and listening that's about the
equivalent of 20 PhD thesis by the way
because you can get a PhD thesis
essentially for three Publications it's
a lot of work and what sort of response
have you had
from the from the med from the broad
medical community like how is your how
is your work being received do people
know this or do they are you on The
Fringe and outer edges of what's
regarded as acceptable medicine how how
have you been received there is a
derogatory
term that is in still widespread use I
have done a study about Emergency Room
Physicians called a patient they would
see with multiple symptoms called a
Gomer yeah get out of my emergency room
yeah because this people take time and
when you have a Health Care system that
gives you 10 or 15 minutes to see a
patient in primary care facilities and
you've got someone who needs two hours
of time who's going to lose the two-hour
patient or the 10-minute patient and
who's gonna go without care so I think
it's a systemic approach not an
individual approach I think our Health
Care system has some of the best
physicians in the world without I'm
biased because I have seen this in
action for 40 years but specific
specifically when we look to see who's
doing the caring it's the primary care
doctors the Specialists there's a hand
in the waiting room there's there's
there's a heart in the in the calf lab
but that's a person with a hand that's a
person with a heart that's a person with
the brain let's look at what the pro
fundamental unit of care has got to be
it's a person Scott and I spent all day
long two hour visits and listen to
people I had one uh rheumatologist give
me a hard time at univiversity of was
Washington and Seattle I sent a patient
in from quarterline who needed to have a
TGF beta one done because he had juile
rumor arthritis was going blind and TGF
beta 1 was the cause of that and he goes
well I've never heard of a TGF beta 1
this is years ago and being a smartass I
said there's only
75,000 papers published on tjf beta 1 I
would not admit that you didn't know any
of them in public if I were you well
right needless to say he got the
teachers beta one the child can see now
but the point is it's hard to read
everything we're asking you to be an
expert in endocrinology an expert in
metabolism an expert in cardiology an
expert in pulmonology we want you to be
an expert in pre-renal azotemia and pots
and pans we want you to do all of it all
day long yeah yeah well when I was first
introduced to this by my daughter I
thought I started to read it and I
thought oh my God you know it's going to
take me 2 years just to get on top of
this conceptually to figure out well
first of all if it's credible
information and second of all to really
understand how I would possibly
reorganize my life to deal with it so
it's really a it's a major but on the
other hand you know a long-term
prognosis of chronic depression and
immunological trouble plus Alzheimer
sounds like a pretty dismal way to
conduct you know conduct life so um you
always have to R right well right well
right and I've already discovered some
things about you know how how
immunological systems work I mean I've
been struck to the core by how effective
this carnivore diet has been for so many
people it's and I would have never I
would have never believed that you know
20 years ago the probability that like
just the very idea that people could
live on nothing but meat would have
struck me as in like outright
Preposterous and that it was the actual
that food sensitivity was the cause of
so much immunological suffering or at
least a cause also struck me as highly
improbable but you know here we are it
does seem to be the case and um
certainly the body of data that you guys
have accumulated the studies you've done
they're difficult to once you've go
through them they're very difficult to
just shunt away and ignore and I really
think that's too bad because I would
have just ass soon shunted them away and
ignored them if I had my brothers is
there anything that we haven't covered
in this two-hour presentation now I I I
wanted to ask you the textbook that you
said that was um Art and Science of s
medicine treatment medicine Art and
Science of Sir medicine okay so that's
where medical practitioners can learn
about this what's the best source for
just general public people I know my
daughter's put up a big website about s
Related Disorders um and we'll put that
in the in the uh links but what where
should people go online to gather more
information about this there two
goodbites Scott Scott one s
x surviving molds another one Scott tell
about s x well I was going to say the
places where the most knowledge the most
trusted trusted knowledge is the most uh
literature the most videos about this
are either from Dr shoemakers www.s
surviving mold or CX
csx.com I think you go to those two
places you can find just about anything
you need including uh a local provider
Who would know something about this if
you think that you have this illness
okay okay so those two places are fairly
exhaustive and complimentary okay Dr man
McMahon is there anything that you would
like to bring to the attention of people
who are watching and listening before as
everybody watching and listening knows
we're going to do another half an hour
with these two gentlemen behind the
daily War plus platform but before we
turn to that Dr McMahon is there
anything else that you would like to
bring to the attention of the people who
are watching and listening there's
really just one other part of the path
of physiology that we didn't discuss and
that is the bloodb brain barrier most
people including myself when I was going
through medical schools thought of uh an
artery that carries blood as being like
a garden hose the the blood enters one
end and it comes out the other but it
turns out that actually the cells that
make up the lining of blood vessels is
pretty porous and small proteins and
fluid can flow outside of the blood
vessels and into the body where the
cells are and the cells don't seem to
mind that maybe they get a little extra
snack and in addition you've got the
lymph system to clean that up but the
brain is much more sensitive tissue and
the brain doesn't want all those
potential chemicals and possibly toxins
oozing into it so by five days of Life
the brain has sent cells to interpolate
into the uh those arteries that are
feeding the brain and create